Create rule S6474(docker): Using remote artifacts without authenticity and integrity checks is security-sensitive (APPSEC-282) (#1405)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6474/docker/rule.adoc

In the build environment, where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images,
malicious code could gain access to sensitive data, such as build secrets or
source code, and durably poison the resulting image.

In the runtime environments where the container images are executed, malicious
code could access and modify all runtime data and use the container as a pivot
to attack the surrounding network environment.

By ensuring that a remote artifact is exactly what it is supposed to be before
it is used, the environment is protected from unexpected changes before or
after it is downloaded. +
That is to say if it has been replaced by malware:

* on the website where it is published.
* in the environment where it is used.

Important note: HTTPS protects data in transit from one host to another. It
provides authenticity and integrity checks *for the network stream*, not for
the downloaded artifact itself.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* The artifact is a file intended to execute code.
* The artifact is a file that is intended to configure or affect running code in some way.

There is a risk if you answer yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

> To ensure that an artifact is the expected one, `gpg` is the preferred

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make authenticity and integrity checks, `gpg` is the preferred
```

Using remote artifacts without authenticity and integrity checks can lead to
the unexpected installation of malicious software in the built container image.

In the build environment, where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images,
malicious code could gain access to sensitive data, such as build secrets or
source code, and durably poison the resulting image.

In the runtime environments where the container images are executed, malicious
code could access and modify all runtime data and use the container as a pivot
to attack the surrounding network environment.

By ensuring that a remote artifact is exactly what it is supposed to be before
it is used, the environment is protected from unexpected changes before or
after it is downloaded. +
That is to say if it has been replaced by malware:

* on the website where it is published.
* in the environment where it is used.

> Archives must also be checked before decompression to protect against malicious
> archives, such as "decompression bombs."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Archives must also be checked before decompression to protect against malicious
archives, such as "decompression bombs."

Important note: HTTPS protects data in transit from one host to another. It
provides authenticity and integrity checks *for the network stream*, not for
the creator of the downloaded artifact.

== Ask Yourself Whether

* The artifact is a file intended to execute code.
* The artifact is a file that is intended to configure or affect running code in some way.

There is a risk if you answer yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

To ensure that an artifact is the expected artifact, `gpg` is the preferred
method, except on Windows hosts, since it is not available by default. In this
case, *authenticode* is the method of choice.

If the remote publisher does not provide a signature for the desired artifact,
hash verification is the most reliable solution. While it does not prove who
the creator of the artifact is, it does ensure that the file has not been
modified since the Dockerfile was created.

> In this case, the secure hash algorithms include `SHA512`, `SHA384`, `SHA256`
> and sHA224`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the artifact's hash must:

* Be computed with a secure hash algorithm such as `SHA512`, `SHA384`, `SHA256` or `sHA224`.
* Be compared with a secure hash that was *not* downloaded from the same source.
```

Using remote artifacts without authenticity and integrity checks exposes the
containers created from this Dockerfile to the risk of unexpectedly installing
malicious software in the final image.

> In the build environment where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images,
> malicious code could gain access to sensitive data such as build secrets or
> source code ; and use the environment to attack the supply chain
> infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: I don't agree that the malicious code attacks the supply chain *per se*, I think it's more because the supply chain was attacked that the malicious software gets installed.

```suggestion
In the build environment, where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images,
malicious code could gain access to sensitive data, such as build secrets or
source code, and durably poison the resulting image.
```

In the runtime environments where the container images are executed, malicious
code could access and modify all runtime data and use the container as a pivot
to attack the surrounding network environment.

By ensuring that a remote artifact is exactly what it is supposed to be before
it is used, the environment is protected from unexpected changes before or
after it is downloaded. +
That is to say if it has been replaced by malware:

* on the website where it is published.
* in the environment where it is used.

Archives must also be checked before decompression to protect against malicious

> archives, such as "decompression bombs."

Reviewer 2: I would move that to "Recommended secure coding practices"

Reviewer: I deleted it. I think it does not add a lot of value, it will be more interesting when the ADD command will be added IMHO

> Important note: HTTPS protects data in transit from one host to another. It
> provides authenticity and integrity checks *for the network stream*, not for
> the creator of the downloaded artifact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Important note: HTTPS protects data in transit from one host to another. It
provides authenticity and integrity checks *for the network stream*, not for
the downloaded artifact itself.
```

== Ask Yourself Whether

* The artifact is a file intended to execute code.
* The artifact is a file that is intended to configure or affect running code in some way.

There is a risk if you answer yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

> To ensure that an artifact is the expected artifact, `gpg` is the preferred
> method, except on Windows hosts, since it is not available by default. In this
> case, *authenticode* is the method of choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure that an artifact is the expected one, `gpg` is the preferred
method, except on Windows hosts, since it is not available by default. In this
case, *authenticode* is the method of choice.
```

> To ensure that an artifact is the expected artifact, `gpg` is the preferred
> method, except on Windows hosts, since it is not available by default. In this
> case, *authenticode* is the method of choice.

Reviewer 2: I would add why it is.
```suggestion
To ensure that an artifact is the expected artifact, `gpg` is the preferred
method, except on Windows hosts, since it is not available by default. In this
case, *authenticode* is the method of choice. Indeed, both of them verify both the content's authenticity and integrity.
```

> If the remote publisher does not provide a signature for the desired artifact,
> hash verification is the most reliable solution. While it does not prove who
> the creator of the artifact is, it does ensure that the file has not been
> modified since the Dockerfile was created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the remote publisher does not provide a signature for the desired artifact,
hash verification is the most reliable solution. While it does not prove who
the creator of the artifact is, it does ensure that the file has not been
modified since the fingerprint was computed.
```

In this case, the artifact's hash must:

> * Be computed with a secure hash algorithm such as `SHA512`, `SHA384`, `SHA256` or `sHA224`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Be computed with a secure hash algorithm such as `SHA512`, `SHA384`, `SHA256` or `SHA224`.
```

* Be compared with a secure hash that was *not* downloaded from the same source.

> *Note: Use the SHA256 fix together with the version binding: avoid using tags
> like "latest" or similar, so that container builds are not corrupted when the
> version of the remote artifact changes.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Note: Use the SHA256 fix together with version binding. Avoid using tags
like "latest" or similar, so that container builds are not corrupted when the
version of the remote artifact changes.*
```

Downloading data without improved authenticity and integrity checks weakens the

> supply chain and runtime infrastructures. +

Reviewer: No, here I wanted to highlight that an attack on a Dockerfile could also bring an attack to the environment that builds the Dockerfile. So maybe "build-time" should be better here. Or "supply-chain's Dockerfile build". WDYT?

Depending on the organization`s internal infrastructure, there are at least two victims:

> * Its supply chain pipelines, where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images

Reviewer 2: Not a huge fan of "supply chain pipelines. I would also add an explanation of how it is affected.
```suggestion
* The build environment, where Dockerfiles are compiled into container images. In that case, the malicious code might get access to temporary secret storages or other build-time sensitive data.
```

> * Its production environments where the container images are run.

Reviewer 2: Same thing here.
```suggestion
* The runtime environments where the container images are run. In that case, the malicious code will be in a position to access and modify any runtime data and use the container as a pivot to attack the surrounding network environment.
```

> Generally, any environment where the container image is running is at risk,
> whether a test environment, a User Acceptance Test (UAT) environment,
> pre-production, production, or a development machine.

Reviewer 2: I feel the enumeration is too much here.

```suggestion
Generally, any environment where the container image is run is at risk,
be it a production environment or not.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: From here, I think we are getting a bit off-topic. Or a bit too far. I would go for a shorter explanation.

```suggestion
While verifying a remote host identity, through the use of a TLS overlay, is a mandatory security measure to ensure communications security, it might be insufficient when facing more advanced attack scenarios. Indeed, a TLS-secured connection, as used in HTTPS for example, will ensure the remote host's identity and in-transit data are not tampered with. However, it can not ensure that downloaded content has not been compromised before or after the download occurred.

Moreover, some network or software components, like enterprise proxy servers and antivirus, might be capable of intercepting a secure connection. Those also increase the threat over the software supply chain.

In all those cases, adding an authenticity or integrity check for any software downloaded from a remote location is an efficient in-depth security measure.
```

operating system level. +
And these products are also subject to security vulnerabilities.

In addition, malicious software can also perform packet inspections by
penetrating the network internals of operating systems or trusted certificate
stores. +
This raises the question of the extent to which the server is protected and
trusted. This falls outside the scope of this rule.

Using a second verification method in addition to HTTPS checks allows for a
more in-depth defense and reliance on "what-if" cases, such as:

* What if the certificate authorities are attacked, and their data is tampered with?
* What if my certificate store is compromised?
** Because the systems that populated the store have been compromised?
** Because my own system could be compromised?
** Because the system running my code is managed by a third party and could be compromised?
* What if the system running my code is performing packet inspection?
* What if DNS services are attacked and compromise the authenticity and integrity checks that are performed thanks to HTTPS?

== Ask Yourself Whether

* The downloaded artifact is executed as code.

> * The downloaded artifact is used as a configuration file.

Reviewer 2: Is this really checked?

Reviewer: Yeah, the implementation checks everything downloaded

> * The infrastructure network path to this remote artifact is across many different systems.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure this is really relevant.

There is a risk if you answered yes to any of these questions.

== Recommended Secure Coding Practices

It is recommended to use `HTTPS` in conjunction with another method to perform
authenticity and integrity checks.

For example, PGP (GPG) and Microsoft`s Authenticode service are two viable options.

The former is based on a decentralized approach called **Web of trust**, the
latter on a mixture of certificate and reputation.

> If it is not possible to use a method that includes authenticity **and**
> integrity checks, one option is to perform only an integrity check by
> determining the hash of the software to be used or its installation file and
> comparing it to the hash of the downloaded remote artifact. +
> It should be performed using a robust hash algorithm such as SHA256.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If it is not possible to use a method that includes both authenticity **and**
integrity checks, one option is to perform only an integrity check by
determining the hash of the software to be used or of its installation files and
comparing it to the hash of the downloaded remote artifact. +
This should be performed using a robust hash algorithm such as SHA256.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I would add that downloading the hashfile along with the software package is **not** compliant.

*Note: Use the SHA256 fix together with version binding: avoid using tags like
"latest" or similar so that container builds are not broken when the version of
the remote artifact changes.*

== Sensitive Code Example

For Linux-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM debian

> # Direct curl bashing

Reviewer 2: I am not sure "curl bashing" is an appropriate wording here.

Reviewer: Yeah, we don't need new slang. Let's remove it.

```suggestion
```

RUN curl https://example.com/installer.sh | bash # Sensitive

# Indirect code execution
RUN curl https://example.com/installer.py -o installer.py; \
    python3 installer.py # Sensitive
----

For Windows-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/windows/servercore:ltsc2019

# Direct download and launch
RUN Invoke-Expression ((new-object net.webclient).DownloadString('https://example.com/installer.ps1')) # Sensitive

# Indirect code execution
RUN Invoke-WebRequest 'https://example.com/installer.py' -OutFile 'installer.py' -UseBasicParsing ; \
    python script.py; # Sensitive
----

== Compliant Solution

GPG solution for Linux-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM debian

ENV GPG_KEY_SERVER "hkps://keys.openpgp.org"
ENV GPG_KEY_ID     "A035C8C19219BA821ECEA86B64E628F8D684696D"

RUN set -eux; \
    \
    wget -O installer.tar.xz     "https://example.com/installer.tar.xz"; \
    wget -O installer.tar.xz.asc "https://example.com/installer.tar.xz.asc"; \
    \
    GNUPGHOME="$(mktemp -d)"; export GNUPGHOME; \
    gpg --batch --keyserver ${GPG_KEY_SERVER} --recv-keys "${GPG_KEY_ID}"; \

>     gpg --batch --verify installer.tar.xz.asc installer.tar.xz; \
>     \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gpg --batch --verify installer.tar.xz.asc installer.tar.xz
```

    command -v gpgconf > /dev/null && gpgconf --kill all || :; \

>     rm -rf "$GNUPGHOME" installer.tar.xz.asc;

Reviewer 2: I would not include this here.

Reviewer: 👍 

```suggestion
```

----

> For Windows-based images, GPG is not available by default, so it needs to be
> prealably downloaded. This poses a problem of trust transfer to `gpg4win.org`. +
> To verify `GPG4Win`, we can chose to transfer our trust to Microsoft's trust
> infrastructure, and use Authenticode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Windows-based images, GPG is not available by default, so it needs to be
downloaded beforehand. This poses a problem of trust transfer to `gpg4win.org`. +
To verify `GPG4Win`, we can choose to transfer our trust to Microsoft's trust
infrastructure, and use Authenticode.
```

> It is recommended to avoid using a software to verify itself. Doing this makes
> it vulnerable to trojanized versions of itself, that will always return that
> they trust themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to avoid using software to verify itself. Compromised verification software might always validate itself.
```

ENV SOFTWARE_GPG_KEYSERVER           "hkps://keys.openpgp.org"
ENV SOFTWARE_GPG_KEY_ID              "A035C8C19219BA821ECEA86B64E628F8D684696D"

# Download and verify software - Using gpg4win
# You can use gpg4win and Authenticode.
RUN $url = ('https://example.com/software-${SOFTWARE_VERSION}.exe'); \
    \
    [Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12; \
    Invoke-WebRequest -Uri $url     -OutFile 'software.exe'; \
    Invoke-WebRequest -Uri $url.asc -OutFile 'software.exe.asc'; \
    \
    if ( (Get-AuthenticodeSignature 'software.exe').Status -ne 'Valid' ) \
        { Write-Error 'Authenticode check failed.' } ; \
    if ( (Get-AuthenticodeSignature "software.exe").SignerCertificate.Thumbprint -ne '${GPG_SIGNER}' ) \
        { Write-Error 'Authenticode signer check failed.'; }; \
    \
    gpg --batch --keyserver "${SOFTWARE_GPG_KEYSERVER}" --recv-keys "${SOFTWARE_GPG_KEY_ID}"; \
    gpg --batch --verify software.exe.asc software.exe;
----

SHA256 solution for Linux-based images:
[source,docker]
----
FROM debian

ENV ARTIFACT_SHA256 "f2ca1bb6c7e907d06dafe4687e579fce76b37e4e93b7605022da52e6ccc26fd2"

> # Here, trust is transferred to the distribution's own package management trust model.

Reviewer 2: This is not obvious. I would rather remove this sentence.

RUN set -eux; \
    \
    wget -O installer.py "https://example.com/installer.py"; \
    echo "$ARTIFACT_SHA256 *installer.py" | sha256sum -c -; \
----

SHA256 solution for Windows-based images:

[source,docker]
----
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/windows/servercore:ltsc2019

ENV SOFTWARE_SHA256 "f2ca1bb6c7e907d06dafe4687e579fce76b37e4e93b7605022da52e6ccc26fd2"

RUN Invoke-WebRequest 'https://example.com/software.exe' -OutFile 'software.exe' -UseBasicParsing ; \
    $fileHash = Get-FileHash 'software.exe' -Algorithm sha256; \
    if ( $fileHash.Hash -ne '${SOFTWARE_SHA256}' ) \

>         { Write-Error 'Integrity checki failed.'; };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        { Write-Error 'Integrity check failed.'; };
```

    Start-Process .\software.exe;
----

== See

* https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/384.html[MITRE, CWE-345] -  Insufficient Verification of Data Authenticity

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe add documentation to GPG trust and authenticode:

- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/install/authenticode
- https://www.linux.com/training-tutorials/pgp-web-trust-core-concepts-behind-trusted-communication/ ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/install/authenticode[Microsoft, Authenticode Digital Signatures]
* https://www.linux.com/training-tutorials/pgp-web-trust-core-concepts-behind-trusted-communication/[Linux.com, PGP Web of Trust: Core Concepts Behind Trusted Communication]
```

ifdef::env-github,rspecator-view[]

'''
== Implementation Specification
(visible only on this page)

=== Message

> Set in https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/SONARIAC-478[SONARIAC-478].

Reviewer 2: There are better chances that this document is updated than the ticket itself.

Reviewer: You are right. And Hendrik told me the same on another PR.

```suggestion
* "Standard stream piping" detection: Downloading from this location without authenticity and integrity checks expose the container to network attacks. Make sure it is safe here.
* Invoke-Expression: Running code without authenticity and integrity checks expose the container to network attacks. Make sure it is safe here.
* File downloaded and used without checks: The authenticity and integrity of this artifact are not checked and expose the container to network attacks. Make sure it is safe here.
```

=== Highlighting

> Set in https://sonarsource.atlassian.net/browse/SONARIAC-478[SONARIAC-478].

Reviewer 2: There are better chances that this document is updated than the ticket itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "Standard stream piping" detection: The downloading command.
* Invoke-Expression: the full instruction
* File downloaded and used without checks: The URL
```
